README.md, before:

# NachonekoBot-V2

![Docker Build](https://github.com/KimmyXYC/NachonekoBot-V2/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml/badge.svg)

## Description

NachonekoBot is a multifunctional Telegram Bot with various useful and interesting features. It's designed to be easy to deploy and configure, with support for both standard Python installation and Docker deployment.

## Features

- Multi-language support
- Modular plugin system
- PostgreSQL database integration
- Easy configuration with YAML and TOML files
- Docker support for simple deployment

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11 or higher
- PostgreSQL database (for standard installation)
- Docker and Docker Compose (for Docker installation)

### Standard Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/KimmyXYC/NachonekoBot-V2.git
   cd NachonekoBot-V2
   ```

2. Install dependencies using PDM:
   ```bash
   pip install pdm
   pdm install
   ```

3. Set up PostgreSQL:
   - Install PostgreSQL if not already installed
   - Create a database for the bot
   - Note the database connection details (host, port, database name, username, password)

4. Set up configuration files:
   ```bash
   cp .env.exp .env  # Configuration file for Telegram bot token
   cp conf_dir/config.yaml.exp conf_dir/config.yaml
   ```

5. Edit the configuration files with your own values:
   ```bash
   nano .env  # Edit this configuration file to set your Telegram bot token
   nano conf_dir/config.yaml  # Configure database connection and other settings
   ```

   The `.env` file contains the following configuration options:
   ```
   TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN=your_bot_token_here
   # TELEGRAM_BOT_PROXY_ADDRESS=socks5://127.0.0.1:7890
   ```
   - `TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN`: Your Telegram bot token obtained from BotFather
   - `TELEGRAM_BOT_PROXY_ADDRESS`: (Optional) Proxy address for connecting to Telegram API, uncomment if needed

6. Run the bot:
   ```bash
   pdm run python main.py
   ```

### Docker Installation

#### Prerequisites

- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)

#### Configuration

Before running the application, set up the configuration files in the `conf_dir` directory:
- `config.yaml`: Main configuration file for the bot
- `settings.toml`: Settings for Dynaconf

Example configuration files are provided:
- `config.yaml.exp`: Example main configuration
- `settings.toml.example`: Example Dynaconf settings

You can copy and rename these files:
```bash
cp .env.exp .env  # Configuration file for Telegram bot token
cp conf_dir/config.yaml.exp conf_dir/config.yaml
cp conf_dir/settings.toml.example conf_dir/settings.toml
```

The `.env` file contains the following configuration options:
```
TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN=your_bot_token_here
# TELEGRAM_BOT_PROXY_ADDRESS=socks5://127.0.0.1:7890
```
- `TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN`: Your Telegram bot token obtained from BotFather
- `TELEGRAM_BOT_PROXY_ADDRESS`: (Optional) Proxy address for connecting to Telegram API, uncomment if needed

At minimum, configure the database connectionn in `config.yaml`:
```yaml
database:
  host: postgres
  port: 5432
  dbname: nachonekobot
  user: postgres
  password: postgres

  # Other Telegram settings
```

#### Environment Variables

You can customize the deployment by setting environment variables:
- `POSTGRES_USER`: PostgreSQL username (default: postgres)
- `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`: PostgreSQL password (default: postgres)
- `POSTGRES_DB`: PostgreSQL database name (default: nachonekobot)
- `DEBUG`: Set to "true" to enable debug mode (default: false)

#### Running with Docker Compose

1. Start the application:
   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

2. View logs:
   ```bash
   docker-compose logs -f app
   ```

3. Stop the application:
   ```bash
   docker-compose down
   ```

4. Stop the application and remove volumes:
   ```bash
   docker-compose down -v
   ```

#### Data Persistence

The following data is persisted:
- PostgreSQL data: Stored in a Docker volume
- Configuration files: Mounted from the host's `conf_dir` directory
- Application data: Stored in the `data` directory
- Logs: Stored in `run.log`

#### Troubleshooting

1. If the application fails to connect to the database, check:
   - PostgreSQL container is running: `docker-compose ps`
   - Database credentials in `config.yaml` match the environment variables
   - Database initialization was successful: `docker-compose logs postgres`

2. If the bot doesn't respond, check:
   - Application logs: `docker-compose logs app`
   - Telegram token in configuration
   - Network connectivity

#### Security Notes

- In production, never use default passwords
- Consider using Docker secrets or a secure environment variable management system
- Restrict access to the PostgreSQL port (5432) if exposed

### Systemd Service Installation (Linux)

#### Prerequisites

- Linux system with systemd
- Python 3.12 or higher
- PostgreSQL database
- PDM package manager

#### Installation Steps

1. Clone the repository to `/opt/NachonekoBot-V2` (or your preferred location):
   ```bash
   sudo mkdir -p /opt/NachonekoBot-V2
   sudo git clone https://github.com/KimmyXYC/NachonekoBot-V2.git /opt/NachonekoBot-V2
   ```

2. Create a dedicated user for the bot (recommended for security):
   ```bash
   sudo useradd -r -s /bin/false nachonekobot
   sudo chown -R nachonekobot:nachonekobot /opt/NachonekoBot-V2
   ```

3. Install dependencies using PDM:
   ```bash
   cd /opt/NachonekoBot-V2
   sudo pip install pdm
   sudo -u nachonekobot pdm install
   ```

4. Set up PostgreSQL:
   - Install PostgreSQL if not already installed
   - Create a database and user for the bot
   - Configure database connection in config.yaml

5. Configure the bot:
   ```bash
   sudo -u nachonekobot cp .env.exp .env
   sudo -u nachonekobot cp conf_dir/config.yaml.exp conf_dir/config.yaml
   sudo -u nachonekobot nano .env  # Edit to set your Telegram bot token
   sudo -u nachonekobot nano conf_dir/config.yaml  # Configure database and other settings
   ```

6. Copy the systemd service file:
   ```bash
   sudo cp /opt/NachonekoBot-V2/nachonekobot.service /etc/systemd/system/
   ```

7. Enable and start the service:
   ```bash
   sudo systemctl daemon-reload
   sudo systemctl enable nachonekobot.service
   sudo systemctl start nachonekobot.service
   ```

8. Check the service status:
   ```bash
   sudo systemctl status nachonekobot.service
   ```

9. View logs:
   ```bash
   sudo journalctl -u nachonekobot.service -f
   ```

#### Service Management

- Start the service: `sudo systemctl start nachonekobot.service`
- Stop the service: `sudo systemctl stop nachonekobot.service`
- Restart the service: `sudo systemctl restart nachonekobot.service`
- Check status: `sudo systemctl status nachonekobot.service`
- View logs: `sudo journalctl -u nachonekobot.service -f`
- Enable at boot: `sudo systemctl enable nachonekobot.service`
- Disable at boot: `sudo systemctl disable nachonekobot.service`

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License — see the LICENSE.md file for details

Commit message:

docs: update README with reusable bot template details and alternative dependency/install methods
- Highlighted the project's role as a generic plugin-based bot template for easier development and community contribution.
- Added instructions for `uv` as an alternative to `pdm` for dependency installation and running the bot.
- Enriched documentation with additional context on reusable architecture and plugin system benefits.

README.md, after:

# NachonekoBot-V2

![Docker Build](https://github.com/KimmyXYC/NachonekoBot-V2/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml/badge.svg)

## Description

NachonekoBot is a multifunctional Telegram Bot with various useful and interesting features. It's designed to be easy to deploy and configure, with support for both standard Python installation and Docker deployment.

This project can also serve as a generic, plugin-based bot template. It helps developers bootstrap new bots quickly and contributes reusable architecture patterns back to the open-source community.

## Features

- Multi-language support
- Modular plugin system
- Reusable generic template for plugin-based bots
- PostgreSQL database integration
- Easy configuration with YAML and TOML files
- Docker support for simple deployment

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11 or higher
- PostgreSQL database (for standard installation)
- Docker and Docker Compose (for Docker installation)

### Standard Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/KimmyXYC/NachonekoBot-V2.git
   cd NachonekoBot-V2
   ```

2. Install dependencies (choose one method):

   - Using PDM:
     ```bash
     pip install pdm
     pdm install
     ```

   - Using uv:
     ```bash
     pip install uv
     uv sync
     ```

3. Set up PostgreSQL:
   - Install PostgreSQL if not already installed
   - Create a database for the bot
   - Note the database connection details (host, port, database name, username, password)

4. Set up configuration files:
   ```bash
   cp .env.exp .env  # Configuration file for Telegram bot token
   cp conf_dir/config.yaml.exp conf_dir/config.yaml
   ```

5. Edit the configuration files with your own values:
   ```bash
   nano .env  # Edit this configuration file to set your Telegram bot token
   nano conf_dir/config.yaml  # Configure database connection and other settings
   ```

   The `.env` file contains the following configuration options:
   ```
   TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN=your_bot_token_here
   # TELEGRAM_BOT_PROXY_ADDRESS=socks5://127.0.0.1:7890
   ```
   - `TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN`: Your Telegram bot token obtained from BotFather
   - `TELEGRAM_BOT_PROXY_ADDRESS`: (Optional) Proxy address for connecting to Telegram API, uncomment if needed

6. Run the bot:

   - If you use PDM:
     ```bash
     pdm run python main.py
     ```

   - If you use uv:
     ```bash
     uv run python main.py
     ```

### Docker Installation

#### Prerequisites

- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)

#### Configuration

Before running the application, set up the configuration files in the `conf_dir` directory:
- `config.yaml`: Main configuration file for the bot
- `settings.toml`: Settings for Dynaconf

Example configuration files are provided:
- `config.yaml.exp`: Example main configuration
- `settings.toml.example`: Example Dynaconf settings

You can copy and rename these files:
```bash
cp .env.exp .env  # Configuration file for Telegram bot token
cp conf_dir/config.yaml.exp conf_dir/config.yaml
cp conf_dir/settings.toml.example conf_dir/settings.toml
```

The `.env` file contains the following configuration options:
```
TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN=your_bot_token_here
# TELEGRAM_BOT_PROXY_ADDRESS=socks5://127.0.0.1:7890
```
- `TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN`: Your Telegram bot token obtained from BotFather
- `TELEGRAM_BOT_PROXY_ADDRESS`: (Optional) Proxy address for connecting to Telegram API, uncomment if needed

At minimum, configure the database connectionn in `config.yaml`:
```yaml
database:
  host: postgres
  port: 5432
  dbname: nachonekobot
  user: postgres
  password: postgres

  # Other Telegram settings
```

#### Environment Variables

You can customize the deployment by setting environment variables:
- `POSTGRES_USER`: PostgreSQL username (default: postgres)
- `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`: PostgreSQL password (default: postgres)
- `POSTGRES_DB`: PostgreSQL database name (default: nachonekobot)
- `DEBUG`: Set to "true" to enable debug mode (default: false)

#### Running with Docker Compose

1. Start the application:
   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

2. View logs:
   ```bash
   docker-compose logs -f app
   ```

3. Stop the application:
   ```bash
   docker-compose down
   ```

4. Stop the application and remove volumes:
   ```bash
   docker-compose down -v
   ```

#### Data Persistence

The following data is persisted:
- PostgreSQL data: Stored in a Docker volume
- Configuration files: Mounted from the host's `conf_dir` directory
- Application data: Stored in the `data` directory
- Logs: Stored in `run.log`

#### Troubleshooting

1. If the application fails to connect to the database, check:
   - PostgreSQL container is running: `docker-compose ps`
   - Database credentials in `config.yaml` match the environment variables
   - Database initialization was successful: `docker-compose logs postgres`

2. If the bot doesn't respond, check:
   - Application logs: `docker-compose logs app`
   - Telegram token in configuration
   - Network connectivity

#### Security Notes

- In production, never use default passwords
- Consider using Docker secrets or a secure environment variable management system
- Restrict access to the PostgreSQL port (5432) if exposed

### Systemd Service Installation (Linux)

#### Prerequisites

- Linux system with systemd
- Python 3.12 or higher
- PostgreSQL database
- PDM package manager

#### Installation Steps

1. Clone the repository to `/opt/NachonekoBot-V2` (or your preferred location):
   ```bash
   sudo mkdir -p /opt/NachonekoBot-V2
   sudo git clone https://github.com/KimmyXYC/NachonekoBot-V2.git /opt/NachonekoBot-V2
   ```

2. Create a dedicated user for the bot (recommended for security):
   ```bash
   sudo useradd -r -s /bin/false nachonekobot
   sudo chown -R nachonekobot:nachonekobot /opt/NachonekoBot-V2
   ```

3. Install dependencies using PDM:
   ```bash
   cd /opt/NachonekoBot-V2
   sudo pip install pdm
   sudo -u nachonekobot pdm install
   ```

4. Set up PostgreSQL:
   - Install PostgreSQL if not already installed
   - Create a database and user for the bot
   - Configure database connection in config.yaml

5. Configure the bot:
   ```bash
   sudo -u nachonekobot cp .env.exp .env
   sudo -u nachonekobot cp conf_dir/config.yaml.exp conf_dir/config.yaml
   sudo -u nachonekobot nano .env  # Edit to set your Telegram bot token
   sudo -u nachonekobot nano conf_dir/config.yaml  # Configure database and other settings
   ```

6. Copy the systemd service file:
   ```bash
   sudo cp /opt/NachonekoBot-V2/nachonekobot.service /etc/systemd/system/
   ```

7. Enable and start the service:
   ```bash
   sudo systemctl daemon-reload
   sudo systemctl enable nachonekobot.service
   sudo systemctl start nachonekobot.service
   ```

8. Check the service status:
   ```bash
   sudo systemctl status nachonekobot.service
   ```

9. View logs:
   ```bash
   sudo journalctl -u nachonekobot.service -f
   ```

#### Service Management

- Start the service: `sudo systemctl start nachonekobot.service`
- Stop the service: `sudo systemctl stop nachonekobot.service`
- Restart the service: `sudo systemctl restart nachonekobot.service`
- Check status: `sudo systemctl status nachonekobot.service`
- View logs: `sudo journalctl -u nachonekobot.service -f`
- Enable at boot: `sudo systemctl enable nachonekobot.service`
- Disable at boot: `sudo systemctl disable nachonekobot.service`

## Contributing

By sharing a reusable bot template and plugin architecture, this project aims to lower the barrier for new bot projects and create practical value for the open-source community.

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License — see the LICENSE.md file for details
